Okay, so
our last kind of list is the menu list.
And I am going to open this
up in a new tab for you.
And so menu lists are designed to be
used where you have a series of buttons.
And this leads into a discussion
about buttons versus links.
So let's talk about that first
before we get into the styling.
So the menu link or the, I'm sorry,
the menu element is designed for
interactive elements,
like the HTML button element.
In other words, anytime that clickable
things in HTML, there's two of them,
there's A, as in Ahref, and
there are buttons, as in button, okay?
And the difference here is that A, Ahref,
when you click that, you go somewhere.
You go within the page,
you go to another page on the site,
you go to a page off site.
It's a traveling kind of thing.
We're going somewhere with links.
When you click a button, HTML button,
we are interested in executing something.
So generally speaking,
there's gonna be some kind of JavaScript
associated with those buttons.
In whatever way you wanna do it,
I'm not suggesting, here,
we're trying to suggest that
onclick is the way to do a button.
I am not a JavaScript person.
Don't pay any attention
to me in that regard.
I actually copied this off of
the MDN site as their example.
But however it is that you're making
these buttons, do their button thing,
that is something that would wind up being
marked up as specifically as a button.
So here's an example of perhaps a button
group, where we would be cut, copy, paste.
As I said earlier, an email,
set of buttons where we had reply,
reply all, forward, that kind of thing,
that those groups of buttons are a great
place to use this menu element.
So that is the difference between A and
button.
And that is what menu is for.
I'll mention down here that those of
you who are thinking about navigation,
navigation is different, right?
Navigation is an unordered list of
links that goes somewhere else,
usually on the same website,
but occasionally,
you might have one that goes off
to social media or whatever else.
Those are specifically going somewhere,
when you click it,
you're traveling to another page.
And so that type of navigation will
be marked up with an unordered list,
not with a menu list.
Even though we call this a menu,
that is not menu in the HTML
definition of the term.
Does that help?
Sort of draw some bright lines between
menu and navigation and buttons and links.
Sound good?
Okay, so one of the popular things
in frameworks like Bootstrap is
styling a button group, right,
where you have a cool looking little
bar that's got all your buttons and
it's got all your hover states.
So let's go through how we
might doing exactly that.
And I'm gonna do it here using
this menu with the class of group.
Let's go through how we can
write our own styling for
that without having to
leverage a framework.
Okay, so
we'll start with our class of group,
which is also the menu,
that's the top level list.
And, Here we go.
We're gonna set this up.
So we can say list-style-type: none,
right?
That's usually the first thing that you're
gonna wanna do, turn off the bullets.
If you're not using a reset stylesheet,
like normalize,
etc., you're gonna say margin: 0,
padding: 0,
because you don't know what browsers are
gonna do with that from place to place.
Then you can say something
like display: flex.
Of course, you could do grid with
this too, that would be totally fine.
But considering we have
one row of buttons here,
Flexbox is a perfectly
reasonable choice for this.
So display: flex, flex-flow: row wrap.
And then we can justify-content in the
center, because that's prettier, right?
Okay, so that sort of gets
our buttons all together.
The bones of the structure that we're
looking for in terms of a button group.
Then we can add styling to that.
So within our menu group,
we have a button, and
that button probably needs some
styling in order to look decent.
So let's do that, button-color,
oops, background-color:purple.
Color: white.
So we have good contrast and
we can read what's on there.
Font-weight: bold,
make it a little easier to see.
We might juice up the font-size:1.2rem,
okay?
Those ugly little gray lines that
go around those, that's our border.
So we can say border: none.
Remember a lot of the stuff, the styling
was established back in the 90s when we
were really into those
beveled looking buttons.
A lot of that done with borders,
so you can just kill that.
Padding is 0.5rem,
give it a little breathable space.
And we can give it a margin, Of 1rem 0.
So that'll just give us a little bit of
room to get us off the edges of the box
that goes around it.
Okay, Now,
now comes the fun part.
We love our rounded corners, don't we?
And in a button group like this,
we probably wanna round the corners
of the outside buttons, don't we?
Yeah, [LAUGH] that's exactly what
they were just thinking over here.
Okay, that's awesome, but we would
like some rounded corners, please.
Well, you can leverage your old friends,
last-child and first-child.
And that's a great application here
to put those right on these buttons.
So let's take a look at that.
We can say .group li:first-child button,
right?
The first list item and the button.
Why didn't I just say button:first-child?
Cuz it is the first-child, right?
No, So
if I just said button:first-child and
we'll set the background color to be blue,
all of the buttons are blue.
How can they all be first-children?
Anybody have an answer to that?
>> Because all the buttons are first
children of the list of items.
>> All the buttons are first children.
They are children of the list item, and
they're, in fact, only-child, last-child,
or first-child will match those,
[LAUGH] okay?
So that's what's going on there,
that's why you can't necessarily
just say button:first-child.
You're gonna wanna say li:first-child
to select the first list item,
as you can see there, and
then we want the button.
And as always, feel free to throw in
the background-color or something to make
sure you're selecting the right one
before you add additional styles to that.
So now, what I can say is, now that I
know I've got the right one, I could say
padding on the left would be 1rem, give
you a little bit more space on that side.
And then we can say our
border-radius will be something like
whatever makes you happy,
you probably have a variable for this.
Hopefully, you have a variable for this,
because if you're rounding corners here,
you're rounding corners everywhere,
and they all have to be the same,
that kind of lends itself to a variable.
But in any case, we wanna round just
the top left and the top bottom, right?
So by doing it this way, we have
given us a little bit of extra room.
We've rounded that, and
then of course, as you can imagine,
the last one is gonna look
very much the same, right?
Except what am I gonna change here?
Anybody have any ideas?
>> Li:last-child.
>> It's gonna be the last-child now,
right?
Then what?
>> Invert the border-radius to 0770.
>> Okay, change the border-radius, so
it's 0770 because it's the opposite
corners that we want rounded.
Anything else?
>> You did padding-left, so padding-right.
>> Padding-right.
There we go.
Very pretty, okay?
And now, here's the advantage.
So when I decide that I wanna put
in more buttons here, I don't know.
The boss had me add it, [LAUGH] okay?
So when you have to add
more buttons to your menu,
look, they're automatically styled,
aren't they?
So even if I grab my paste,
oops, grab my paste button here,
And I want the boss had me style it,
that's now my outside button.
See how I don't have to mess
around with any classes.
Very nice, right?
Makes your maintenance much, much easier,
especially if you have other users who,
well,
I'm not sure that other users are gonna
be adding buttons to your menu bar.
But who knows, maybe the UX person has
to wind up having to add something or
whatever and they're not quite sure
exactly what you have going on for
the programming.
So this becomes very robust
styling that just applies.
How're you doing so far, okay?
Okay, now,
just to show you the difference here.
I forgot to add a hover state, didn't I?
I didn't add a hover state to my buttons.
So we can add that, .group button:hover,
and that would be
background-color: thistle.
And I think I had a color there too.
Yep, color: purple.
So there we go.
Now,
you have your hover state
there on the buttons too.
So fantastic.
Now, here's the amazing thing.
You just turned that into a button group.
That's a pretty common pattern that
you have for JavaScript based buttons.
You can actually use this exact
same CSS to apply to your navbar.
You just need different selectors.
This is one of
the interesting things here.
So up here at the top, where we
start with group, if we said nav ul,
it applies all of those styles
to our navigation, right?
Be sure to look at your HTML if
you're lost along the way here.
We can then say for our group button,
that's analogous to our nav a.
There they are.
Nav a, yep, and
we have a nav a hover down here.
So we can hover over those buttons.
And we have a,
What would be the selector here, For
our group li:first-child button?
What would be the analog here in
the navbar, For that selector?
So, I'm gonna write a similar selector.
What's it gonna look like?
Look something like nav li:first-child a,
right?
Nav li:last-child.
So then the only things that were missing
here that you have to worry about with
a navigation bar,
an actual navigation bar,
as opposed to a button
group is those underlines.
So we could also say, nav a,
a couple of two things,
text-decoration: none; right?
We don't want those unsightly underlines.
And then the other very,
very important thing is to display: block.
Why do we do that?
Not only because it fits
much nicer in its container,
which is a side benefit, but because
we wind up with big clickable areas.
See how I can just hit the edge of my
button there, and I've selected it, okay?
Without display: block on that a,
a is inline.
So therefore, I have to be over the text
itself in order for it to be seen.
So that is the benefit of
adding display block on the A.
>> What's the difference between
list-style-type: none and
list-style: none?
>> There is no difference between
list-style-type of none and
list-style: none.
Originally, list-style was shorthand for
a couple of image properties,
I think it's list-style-type and
list-style-image and a couple of other
things that you could stack up together.
Kind of the font property you can stack
up inside of the single line of CSS,
you can stack up a size and a color and
font family and a line height.
You can put all that in the font family,
list-style used to be
that same kind of thing.
But list-style-type
are pretty interchangeable.
>> Why do we have menu li
instead of menu ul or li?
>> Okay, because that's a great question.
I'm glad you asked that.
That's because menu is
the actual type of list.
This is a new kind of list, the menu list.
And so it's not a wrapper that
you put around your ul's,
it's like ul, ol, dl, and menu.
Those are the analogous elements.
>> Could you please repeat the portion
on why not to use the menu with
a navigation links?
>> Yeah, so menu, semantically speaking,
is designed for interactive lists.
So in other words,
a list it's gonna contain a bunch of
things when you click a,
we are not going to go somewhere else.
Okay, so a link A, the link tag
is designed to go somewhere else,
whether that's within the page
on your site or page off-site.
That's what that is all about.
So we mark those up with
an unordered list and with links.
Menu, we use with buttons, and
we are going to program those
buttons with JavaScript.
So that's the difference,
we have a list of JavaScript functions or
we have a list of basic HTML links.